Introduction

The assumption of this manual is that you want to simply clobber the game, playing in such a way as to grow your swarm as rapidly as possible, that you're not OCD about efficiency, preferring expediency of action rather than reaching for your calculator, unless reaching for your calculator is actually worthwhile (go out and buy a Sharp EL-520-W this instant! Just kidding, but that is, by considerable distance, my favorite scientific calculator. Actually, you'll probably never need to grab your calculator since people have already done so and posted their recommendations all over the Swarmsim subreddit. Hopefully, all those will be linked in the comments on this manual, and you'll learn, for example, that it isn't exactly 2000 butterflies, etc..) If you're new to Swarmsim and want to really kill the game without cheating or thinking too hard about how, this is the manual for you. However, if you find failing fun and want to figure the game out for yourself, I recommend you abandon this subreddit entirely and head on over to r/kerbalspaceprogram to watch things explode there while waiting for Swarmsim alarms ;)

You probably won't understand the Veteran/Highthink notes here (also, small spoiler.)

Notes for veterans and high thinkers

A "bottom line" which affects many things in the game is the drone population. There is only one special ability that affects this in a major way, and this manual's emphasis on that particular special ability comes through as the best overall strategy. The manual basis game is the fifth-eighth I have played (including the ascent timing forks), so it is highly experimental; I have not worked out the theory as to why this one particular special ability needs to be emphasized so much.

I thought there was a second one, but I think it just got rolled into the first. Maybe I should add that there's more to drone population than that one special ability, which shows up in other parts of the manual (mostly near the beginning and end.)

Suggestions and errata corrections welcome. Thanks in advance.

Basics

Use twinning; pay attention to how many prime+1 units you can build. Before you produce the prime units you need for twinning, build up enough larva or prime-1 units (whichever is build limiting) so that immediately after twinning you're able to build half of the prime units you just spent on twinning. This prevents you taking any hit on lower unit production (i.e. I'm changing the "Consider hatching more queens first" warning on your first nest to "Consider letting the drones build up enough so you can hatch a crapload of queens just after building your first nest." In this first example, "prime+1" is the nest, "prime" is the queen, and "prime-1" is the drone.) This ensures that the population of your prime unit doesn't drop, cutting your prime-1 unit production, so it's a pure upgrade with none of the stalling you'd have otherwise. As soon as you produce the prime+1 units for the twinning and consume them using the upgrade, you have very few prime units, and very little passive production from prime+1 units (none at all if you use the internal @ links that appear after the word "costs" which automatically order the correct number of units in the production input box. These texts are unlinked when they refer to food or larvae. "Meat" rather than food is the official game term, but that sounds awfully King James Version in my opinion .;) The twinning upgrade will instantly double the maximum production of prime units available, allowing you to restore your prime unit population to where it was before.

The Faster upgrade doubles the passive ("They produce" / "You earn") production rate of the food stack unit. This means that half the number of one type of unit will produce the same number of the next down after you hit the upgrade. Therefore set your Faster upgrades to notify at 2x cost as soon as the upgrade appears.

Always get your expansions and Accomplished Ancestry the moment you can afford them, as these are the only things you can use territory on, and they increase your larvae production. You might have already noticed that it's almost always larvae that you're short of. For hatcheries, use as much food as you can on getting the first ten, producing just a few swarmlings for the easiest of the expansions and the "two base" achievement. After that, use all of your food on fighting units. The reason for this approach is that each hatchery produces a base 1 larvae per second, which means the percentage increase in larvae production drops with each hatchery (there is a zeroth hatchery, so the first hatchery you buy results in a 50% increase in larvae production.) The tenth hatchery gives you a 10% increase in larvae production. An expansion always gives you a 10% increase. Do buy hatcheries if it's taking you only a few seconds to afford them, or you're about to ascend and are looking for the mutagen. (Mutagen? You don't need to worry about that yet.)

Turn on "Show advanced unit data" in More->Options so you can see your potential active unit production rate. "Two-tap" operation is recommended when your passive ratio exceeds 1:100. "Passive ratio" is the ratio of "You earn" just above the input box to "You can hatch" just above the production command buttons. Your prime unit advances when your passive ratio exceeds 2:1. "Two-tap" operation is hitting the buy max button on the prime+1 unit, using all of your prime units and a tiny fraction of the available larva, followed by buy max on the prime unit, using up all the larvae and a tiny fraction of the prime-1 unit. This is done every so often (a kitchen timer set to a few minutes is handy if you're reading a book, Wikipedia, watching Youtube videos or old VHS movies - for readers too young to remember what a book or a VHS is, also look up the word "anachronism". This "every so often" soon gets a formal name, more on which later.)

The Cascade

Once again, your prime unit advances when your passive ratio hits 2:1 on the old prime unit, which becomes the new prime-1 unit. Quit manually producing it at that point (it's a good idea to turn off your twinning upgrade alarm by changing it to "Never notify" or "Hide upgrade".) Eyeballing both of these ratios approximately is good enough; you don't need to pull out your calculator. With your new prime unit, keep twinning as above, making sure you don't wipe out both your prime and prime-1 populations while doing so. Your population of larvae should increase rapidly, and it is good to save these for the prime cascade. Therefore ignore or turn off fighting unit twinning alarms for this phase (they can be most easily turned off by cocooning your larvae, unless you want to turn them off permanently.)

This is important: when your new prime unit hits the "larvae wall", advanced information says "You can hatch n primes every second using 0% of your meat income, 99% [or less] of your prime-1 income, and 100% of your larvae income," you'll have a crap-tonne of larvae to spend on building prime units. Watch for and notice this point for your Nest cacade about an hour into the game. For future cascades, it becomes necessary to use a special ability that is not yet available at this exact point.

The Nexus

Shortly after the Nest cascade, you should see an upgrade alarm on food->Meat. This is your first Nexus; take it the moment it appears, then check out your new energy tab. During the long push for the Greater Queen cascade, the larvae will be available for several million-count population achievements on the fighting units which will increase your larvae production via Accomplished Ancestry. Do this by typing "@1m" into the Hatching input box for each territory unit, which will set the first production button to command just enough production to get the achievement. Don't be afraid of purchasing the 4th twinning upgrade (125k larvae cost) while doing so; not only are those worth it for a million bug purchase, fighting units are not permanently obsolete (more on that later.) It is also here that you'll probably get your third Nexus. Don't worry about spending the Larvae on that, the GQ cascade will still be enormous. Do be careful with the fighting unit Twinning 5 upgrades, which are very expensive during this phase and nowhere near as beneficial as the third Nexus.

For fighting units, it's best to switch to the next unit when the previous one is using about 20% of your larvae income (ignore very early in the game when you can't afford the huge ones.) Use twinning aggressively, when it takes you a minute or two to save up for it. It pays for itself surprisingly fast in larvae savings and expansion growth.

When you build your third Nexus, you'll notice the "Nightbug" appear. You never need these unless your real-life schedule doesn't allow you to visit the swarm every day. They allow you to store up to six times as much energy as without them, but that maximum is approached asymptotically. It is never worth making more than a few hundred nightbugs. Also, if you need to log out of the game, it's a good idea to spend all of your energy first. If you're in a three or four Nexus situation for your first log off, it's best to use it on larvae and food rushes to produce as many fighting units as possible; that'll let you build a bunch of expansions when you get back, increasing your larvae production.

Every now and then, check the Achievements via the larvae->Achievements Points tab or the More->Achievements menu. Unchecking "earned" will make the remaining achievements easier to navigate. There are a number of early manual food unit production achievements that are easy to miss, such as 10,000 drones, or 1 million queens. Head back and type the number into the input box, say "=10k" or "=1m". If it's going to waste a whole bunch of larvae, just leave it and come back later. Two really easy achievements are from clicking on the version number, and scrolling all the way to the bottom of the achievements list and clicking on the first of the three +30 achievements. Another fairly easy one can be had by going to More->Options, saving your game, and reloading it. There is one more for entering the well known NES Konami code (alphabetic 'a' and'b').

Saving/Loading: Go to More->Options and find "Import/export saved data". If your browser is privacy configured, this is the only way to save the game. Copy the gobbledegook in the dialogue box and paste it into a text file (e.g Notepad, WordPad, Word, Writer, Emacs, or if you're one of those people, vi.) Then close and restart your browser, restart the game, head over to the same input box and paste it back in. You should get a blue box telling you how much your swarm produced while you're away and how much all the bugs miss your divine leadership. Or something like that. (Note: if you think your browser is privacy configured wrt blowing out cookies when you close it, but your game comes back, the plugin you need is BetterPrivacy, which blows up the Flash Player LSOs in the same way. Let your venue know if this is happening on a public workstation. Further Note: BetterPrivacy does not yet find Unity3D LSOs; this explains how your AdCap game survives all privacy precautions if you play Adventure Capitalist or other Unity web games. They are in %Appata%/Roaming/Unity/WebPlayerPrefs if you wanted to know.) If you don't make a habit of this (i.e. highly recommend making a habit of this!) remember to do this before clearing your browser cache, updating your browser or its plugins, and doing "Disk Cleanup" via your disk properties menu or whatever the Mac/Linux equivalent is.

On the fourth Nexus, you see "Lepidoptera", which is Latin for butterflies. They generate energy. To get the maximum energy rate the quickest, hatch 2000 before you build your fifth Nexus, and 2000 more (a total of 4000) after you build your fifth Nexus. Details link.

Remember earlier that I said fighting units weren't permanently obsolete? Once you're producing Devourer units, you can check out the "Empower" twinning upgrades carry through Empower upgrades (I never turn off those alarms, but I'm guessing I'm probably in the minority among Swarmsim players for that habit.) Or if you ignore it long enough, you'll start getting the alarms since they come up as "when buyable I've found it best to hide the Empower upgrade since I tend to mistake them for Expansions. Hitting Empower by accident is one of the worst mistakes; that and accidentally wasting a huge pile of larvae on a misclick are the only reasons I ever reach for More->Undo.

Missed Achievements

If you play your initial swarm smartly, without paying attention to food stack population achievements, you'll blow past several. It's a good idea to go back to when it is cheap to do so (i.e. you're producing hundreds of thousands of larvae per second.) 10,000 drones, 1 million queens, and 100 million nests. The simplest way to get these is to type "=10k" or whatever into the appropriate production box and hit the left-hand production order button. or Enter on the keyboard. Or you can go to the Achievements tab and do the arithmetic Unlike with the fighting units, "@1M" won't do it because passive production doesn't count for these achievements. The rest of the high population achievements are met naturally with normal smart playing.

Saving up larvae: There are two reasons to save up larvae. The first is to get your fifth nexus (needs 3.33 billion, and you need that fifth nexus!) The other is the Clone Larvae special ability. It's about the same time, when you're making about 250kl/sec, that you'll want to start saving up these larvae, which translates into a premature Hive Queen cascade push. Using Swarmwarp instead results in a rather hairy decision point at ten million hive queens (HQs), as this is a twinning point for both the HQ and the Hive. I'm not sure whether it is worth taking the hive queen twinning because of the circumstances of when I hit it.

Bats: The ideal number of bats is 100, but you can skip them on the initial swarm, especially if you're almost constantly playing (duty cycle matters little; what matters is how often you visit your swarm. If you're playing infrequently with lots of nightbugs and spending very little time with each play, Clone Larvae becomes a tempting way to expend a lot of energy in a short time, like when you have twenty minutes before work or the SO's arrival, but you have 250K of energy to dump before saving and logging out. Much, much later in the game, you'll find some situations where Swarmwarp does little because you need unfathomable huge numbers of larvae, i.e. the ballpark of the number of quarks in the universe and what Google, Inc. named itself after. I use the word "ballpark" loosely, as there are 20 decades between them. That's like saying a literal ballpark is in the same ballpark as a large galaxy. If you're wondering why Swarmsim has no graphics, now you know!) Suffice it to say that for now, getting into specials earlier vs. growing a few bats to enhance them makes little difference. Stay tuned, 'cus it does matter later on.

How do I know when to start two-tapping if I'm doing twinning on prime+1? The obvious way to the mathematically inclined is to pull out the calculator and multiply the max production order button's number by the "Each produces" number and then divide that by the active production rate indicated for prime. The simple way is to produce a little bit more than is necessary for twinning, say about 10-25%. If you hit the max production order and try to order the twinning upgrade before the next prime production command, you usually have too few prime units for the active production indicator to be 100% larvae limited, which means either waiting a while before hitting the twinning order, consequently slowing down the production of the prime-1 unit, taking the active production number down either in your mind or on paper prior purchasing the prime+1 units for the twinning upgrade (if you remember to do this, this is the best method. I have trouble both remembering to take the number down, and remembering the number itself), or hitting the twinning upgrade before you know. This is where ordering just a few too many, about 10% extra, prime+1 units for the twinning. If the passive ratio then is more than 0.1%:1, it's time to start two-tapping. If it's less, you're better off stocking up your prime units for the benefit of prime-1 production, which carries down through the rest of the stack. I've been astonished by how much keeping an eye on these things helps my performance in the game. It makes the difference between getting considerably more than 100 expansions in the initial swarm, or considerably fewer.

The Hive Queen and Hive Cascades

This is important: when your new prime unit hits the "larvae wall", advanced information says "You can hatch n primes every second using 0% of your meat income, 99% [or less] of your prime-1 income, and 100% of your larvae income."

At this point when you have the maximum "natural" larvae population, hit Clone Larvae several times (until you have about 4 times the amount you can clone) to multiply the effects of the cascade. If you don't have enough energy (i.e. 50,000 or more), log off until enough energy has accumulated even if it delays an ascent. I call it a cascade because when this happens, everything below the prime unit widens in a downhill fashion. The more larvae you have, the bigger the cascade. This done with the Hive Queen cascade, let the game sit for several hours to a day (and/or throw in a few Swarmwarps) and then you can almost immediately push for the Hive Empress cascade. You may, if you want, ascend with a few million mutagen (~10-20 million) but pressing for the Hive Empress cascade offers a big advantage for your first ascent: a third mutation that I thought was between difficult and impossible when I first started this manual. After the first ascent, remember the combination of Swarmwarp to build your prime-1 units, and Clone Larvae to build your larvae, the two combined into a cascade like this is the most powerful strategy for growing your swarm ...unless you want to cheat ;p I've found that it is not worth cloning more than 5x the Clone Larvae maximum because per Swarmwarp larvae production catches up after the cascade.

Latin	English translation of certain names
Arachnomorph	Spider
Culicimorph	Mosquito
Chilodomorph	Centipede
Devourer	Dune(tm) Bug (not used in this manual)
Lepidoptera	Butterfly (most commonly used in this manual)
Drone	Worker (not used: irl, workers gather food, while drones go off to fuck the queens and die, and have no role outside of reproduction. Talk about #YOLO!)
Initial swarm twinning data:

Drones	1-2x (1 or 11 queens used)
Queens	2-3x (11 or 111 nests used)
Nests	3-4x (111 or 1111 GQs used)
Greater Queens	6x (1,111,111 hives used)
Hives	7x (11,111,111 HQs used)
Hive Queens	10x (1.11.. billion HEs used)
Your First Ascent

The overriding consideration for doing an ascent is having at least 35 minutes of time to play after hitting the button so you can build your first four nexus. (This isn't to say you can't do anything on other browser tabs or applications during that time as things do start to settle down after a few minutes.) Before you ascend, drop a full warp and a Meat Rush worth of food into getting only hatcheries in order to maximize your mutagen. Remember this for future ascents. Ascend when you have about 300M mutagen, no less than 270M mutagen. If you're in a rush and ascending before the Hive Empress cascade, you'll need about 65 minutes to build your first four nexus. If you have ~300M mutagen, scroll down after hitting Ascend and hit Mutage Lepidoptera. It will appear on the left side bar. Add 1M mutagen to the Lepidoptera Mutation; you'll never have to add any more for the rest of the game (unless you respec, of course. Enough info on that is provided on the Mutagen tab.) If you have less than 270M mutagen, don't activate any mutations yet. (Note: Except for shaving perhaps 12 hours off the infamous 20 ascent achievement, there is little difference between ascending at about 20M mutagen and 300M mutagen in the long run.)

Each unit of mutagen activated at the ascent will produce a larvae every ten seconds. Head on over to your meat tab to build up the food stack. At first, it'll seem just like an initial start, but once you have a few hundred drones, the benefits of the millions of mutagen larvae per second will become obvious. Remember when you get to the GQ and hive cascades that your specials (Larvae Rush and Clone Larvae) are not available yet. You'll be using a lot more twinning upgrades as the passive production ratios go up to advancing the prime unit at much higher population levels. Pay attention for the first four nexus upgrades (it takes about 32 minutes to get the fourth after any ascent and this is the main requirement for having enough time to play after hitting the ascent button. That's also the point where you'll be buying the first 800 butterflies.)

During the first few hours, be cautious with the Twinning 6 upgrade for your fighting units. Being too aggressive with them can stunt the growth of your food stack because of the larvae consumed. Your hatchery cluster will take some time to catch up to your mutagen larvae production (longer and longer after each ascent, eventually to the point where it never does.) Until it does, your larvae growth rate is nearly constant; it will also drop considerably just after you allocate (or "spec" your mutagen - I coined this term based on the game's "respec" function.)

Mutagen

Mutations are the game's most powerful mechanic, and, as you may have already realized, there is one special ability, and therefore one mutation, that dominates the most successful strategy in Swarm Simulator. This is the Swarmwarp, or ability to accelerate time. The reason for this is mentioned in the veteran/high thinker notes at the beginning of this manual: Swarmwarp is the only special ability that passively produces drones and other units on the food stack. You can unlock two mutations, and the best two to unlock are the warp mutation to enhance the swarmwarp ability, and the bat mutation to enhance all abilities, but swarmwarp is still the final goal. It is at this point that producing about 400-500 bats becomes profitable, and the swarmwarp should be about around 21 hours (as opposed to the 15-18 minutes of the initial swarm, which is about half the time it takes to get the energy for it.) For best results, allocate a third of your mutagen to the bat mutation and the remainder to the warp mutation. The point at which to do this is when your hatchery larvae production is about the same as your mutagen larvae production. This can be seen by looking at your larvae tab "You earn" number at the top and comparing it to the "Currently, your hatcheries produce a total of" number under Upgrades->Hatchery. When this latter number is about half as big as the total, meaning about half the larvae are produced by the hatcheries and half by the mutagen, it is time to give up this larvae production and instead reap the full benefits of mutations. (Lepidoptera Mutation is the third priority mutation, which you already have in the three mutation strategy. It allows you to Swarmwarp twice as often and ascend about 37% sooner if you want to.)

Go very easy on the Empower upgrades for your fighting units until get your first quadrillion achievement. This makes it very easy to simply go down the stack just like the million achievements on your first swarm back at "Missed Achievements" and get them all rather than having to wait until you can build the empowered ones at the top you can only make a few billion of at a time.

Cascade Changes

With only the Bat and Warp mutations taken, your Rush and Clone abilities will be comparatively weak and a waste of energy. This results in less dramatic cascades, but experiments show that focusing exclusively on the Warp mutation for the first ascent is the best strategy (to the tune of having up to ten thousand times as much mutagen for the second ascent!) Warp mutation only leads to 3-4 hour warp while Bat mutation only leads to a roughly 90 minute warp. With Bat and Clone mutations, you don't have enough proper swarm time to take advantage of it.

Your Second Ascent

Before ascending, use only Swarmwarp food for gaining the last few hatcheries (unmutated Meat Rush will actually produce less food than the Warp!) If you have more than 90Qa mutagen, you can unlock a total of five mutations, but only unlock four for now. If you have less than 90Qa only unlock a total of four. The fifth mutation is too expensive and will eat up too much of your mutagen larvae production. If you took the first ascent with two mutations, unlock Lepidoptera Mutation as the third mutation overall. The next two mutations to unlock are Meat and Hatchery; if you have less than 90Qa, only unlock Hatchery Mutation (Clone Larvae is a higher priority, but not worth unlocking before you can use it.) Allocate between 0.1% and 1.0% per click. (If you have, for example, 45.3Qa mutagen, take the value of the third significant digit, 0.1Qa or 100T, type it in the input box. Copy and paste it if that'll make it easier to go through all the mutations.) Allocate this amount to each of Bat, Hatchery, and Meat (if applicable). Allocate only 1M (one million) to Lepidoptera Mutation only if it doesn't already have that from your first ascent. This should leave over 95% of your active mutagen supply producing larvae, now trillions per second. As usual, you need about 33 minutes from reaching the Meat tab to get your fourth nexus built. As soon as you get the fourth nexus, get 800 butterflies (or, if you're absences from the game are longer than 24 hours, a mix of nightbugs and butterflies appropriate to keep your nexus batteries from maxing out during them.)

The rationale behind this mutation strategy is enhancing the Clone Larvae capability once you spec your entire mutagen supply, which you'll want to do fairly evenly to all of the mutations unlocked except Lepidoptera, perhaps with a slight preference for the Warp Mutation. The Clone Mutation is use to amplify the cascade larvae population just as a new prime unit starts to be limited by larvae income rather than passive prime-1 unit production. The Clone Larvae ability is based on hatchery production, so the Hatchery Mutation is intended primarily to feed it. The biggest infinite series upgrade for the hatchery cluster is the expansion, which is produced from Territory generated by fighting units made from food. That's the main reason for the Meat Mutation being next in line. All this is to ameliorate the perpetual larvae problem. (Shit, I'm starting to sound like my math teacher with all these huge words; I have no idea why my English teacher never similarly whacked his students over the head with such vocabulary.)

As usual, the Energy cluster sequence is to make four nexus, as many nightbugs as you need to keep from maxing out the batteries while you're away, then 2000 lepidoptera, the fifth nexus, 2000 more lepidoptera (total 4000), and about 500 bats. It should be just a couple of warps before your hatchery cluster is outproducing your mutagen and you can allocate the rest of your mutagen. Ascend at some point after it costs 50,000 energy after the benefits of the last cascade you plan to run have been felt.

Your Third Ascent

The next mutation after the Meat Mutation is the Territory Mutation (again to benefit the hatchery and Clone Larvae special, although this is beneficial before the Energy cluster is built out.) After this, Frequency, Meta-Mutation, and finally Rushes. As with Lepidoptera Mutation, allocate 1M (one million) and only 1M to the Frequency Mutation, as any more is a waste. (Once you have enormous amounts of mutagen, say, 1e100 (10 duotrigintillion), and you feel like wasting some, maybe put 1e20 (100 quintillion) on each to bring the benefit to the maximum value at the precision limits of the numbers. I don't recommend it because it becomes less obvious that you're done allocating mutagen to these mutations and, if you're like me, you might accidentally waste more mutagen on them later.) About the only thing Rushes Mutation is good for is getting that last hatchery before the ascent for the mutagen by means of the Meat Rush, which is why it's dead last. The reason why the mutagen-related mutations are second last is because there is more benefit to the mutagen bottom line in getting more hatcheries and expansions with the lower mutagen and probabilities.

If You're In a Hurry to get Prestigious

The final achievement is the one for twenty ascents. The fastest way to get there is to use your free respecs under these circumstances: You have a lot of energy, but not quite enough to meet the ascent requirement, which is about one and a half times the energy available. The maxed-out Lepidoptera Mutation imposes a 60% premium on the energy required to ascend. As soon as you respec, this penalty vanishes as you no longer have the mutation, so the energy required to ascend will drop below your supply. You won't lose any energy in the batteries, just the energy production. Ascend, and then reallocate, including the usual 1M to Lepidoptera Mutation, and your energy production is back up to full strength.

Advanced Ascent Trends

As each ascent proceeds, mutagen production of larvae becomes more and more significant, and it takes longer to get the hatchery larvae production up to a level where you can spend all of your mutagen. Since I play with a competent hatchery strategy, and so can you with this manual, the point at which hatchery production can never catch up to mutagen larvae production is theoretical. Once you have about 1e110 mutagen, the hatchery never catches up to mutagen production to a point where you can spec out all your mutagen prior to the next ascent. (The first point this happened with one of my games, I put the ascent on Youtube.) At this point, you can safely ignore the Territory tab and play competently with no expansions at all (they generate tiny amounts of mutagen compared to the hatcheries), or you can do expansions just for the fun (because each subsequent hatchery costs 10x as much as the previous, the savings accumulated from never using food on fighting units probably gets you only one hatchery and the same amount of mutagen as the expansions you'd be getting.) More importantly, the "hidden" cost of Clone Larvae, the need to keep cocooning more and more larvae as your swarm grows in order to keep this ability at its full utility, disappears. One stash of cocoons will now serve, so when you need to amplify a cascade, it is already full, saving th e energy and time necessary to build it up when you have a growing hatchery cluster.

There is a point at which the passive production of OM5 via huge numbers of OM6 will outstrip the ability to actively produce OM5, but it may not be worth producing the OM6 at that point because the passive production of OM4 would be compromised: Eventually, so many OM6 will be required for twinning active production of OM5 that it becomes absurd to produce the required number. The downside is that, because active OM5 twinning is so much more frequent than OM6 faster upgrades, the potential passive production ratio of OM5 will keep diminishing. It may be possible to get a useful passive production ratio once swarmwarps are on the scale of millions of years, but even this would eventually fall out long enough after the ascent as the benefits of using up the OM6 for twinning catches up. In short, unless you're planning to twin OM5 right away, you're better off keeping your OM5 and not making any OM6.

Changes

2015 November 16: Initial upload
2015 November 17: 1st ascent warp actually about 18 hours, not 3; "In short..." added to OM5/OM6 section, as the main point seems to have been missed in early feedback.
2015 November 19: Quadrillion fighting unit achievements. 2015 November 19: 63 minutes after first two ascents for 3rd nexus. (No butterfly mutation.) 2015 November 24: First ascent for three mutations. "The Cascade" expanded and given its own chapter (plus another on specific initial swarm cascades) since the clone-enhanced cascade turned out to be huge. u/fragglefrock clarifications on twinning, and a few more title headers.
2015 December 5: General proofread and update, chapters for 2nd and 3rd ascents added. Chapter for respec accelerated ascent added. I think it's finished.